the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so if we switch to today's lecture notes
we're going to talk today about applying
some of the chemistry knowledge with
clicker questions and a clicker
championship to the issue of using co2
to make biofuels so first I just want to
briefly review the course objectives
what I was hoping people would get out
of this course so I was hoping that you
would know enough that you could do
unknown of chemistry of enough basic
chemistry knowledge to do a Europe in
the chemistry department without taking
any other chemistry classes that in your
opposition's in other departments you
would be using chemistry in your
research that you could also appreciate
how chemistry is used to solve
real-world problems like we're talking
about today make informed decisions
about your own health the health of your
family environmental issues energy
issues a lot of political decisions that
are going on there's a lot of science
actually in the news these days and
hopefully make the world a better place
by applying chemical principles to
problems in science and engineering so
those are my goals and then if we just
kind of look at the material that we've
covered the first half of the course
which will be you know exam 1 exam 2
material talked about sort of the basic
properties of matter atomic theory
periodic table bonding structures and
molecules and then thermodynamics kind
of can transitioned us from thinking
about basic properties to thinking more
about reactivity and how that material
that we've learned about in the first
half how those elements could come
together and react to form molecules and
to think about how things react here to
think about thermodynamics we need to
think about chemical equilibrium
acid-base oxidation and sometimes
transition metals because they are that
middle part of the periodic table can do
amazing chemistry and also kinetics and
solubility so all of these things are
about how material reacts so we can't
review everything but I thought we would
stick with this this sort of carbon
dioxide biofuels theme and see how some
of the things we've learned in this
course would help us understand how we
could approach this problem how people
are trying to sell
this problem so what is the problem
again and junior brought this up you
know co2 is a waste product of
combustion of fossil fuels we want to
remove it from our environment it's a
greenhouse gas it's also leading to the
acidification of the oceans this is not
a molecule we want to round in the kind
of quantities that it is around and I am
personally very concerned about climate
change and after those of you who are
freshman experiences winter I think you
will also be very concerned about
climate change so this is a problem what
is the approach well the idea I think is
really great that you can take co2 and
not just get rid of it but convert it
into something we want which is
alternative fuels like biofuels so I
think this is a really great thing so
are a few ways that one could do it
you could think about designing small
molecule catalysts to do this this is
one thing people are doing but there's
really been a lot of energy on looking
at how nature does things so a lot of
people are interested in nature thinking
about biological pathways that already
do this they already remove co2 from our
environment and fix it form Co form
carbon-carbon bonds and make it into
multi carbon chains that can be used as
biofuels so how do but before we do any
of this before we can go and think about
all any of these solutions we need to
understand the basic properties of co2
its reactivity and more about these
pathways so let's talk about carbon
dioxide and let's think about how carbon
and oxygen are bonded together and we
can use Lewis structures to predict what
the Lewis structure of this should be
what the bonding will be so let's go
ahead with our first clicker question
and predict which of these and we have a
little bit of the periodic table is the
correct lewis structure for co2
okay ten more seconds
all right so we're gonna go through and
just look at what's wrong with some of
these structures as a review but first
can someone tell me for a t-shirt what
is the equation for formal charge and
Elena will bring you the mic 1/2 the
number of bonds that are going on plus
the number of lone pair electrons all
right so we have I think we're missing
one thing so formal charge or maybe I
didn't hear it we have the number of
valence electrons that we have which for
carbon was what for so for carbon was
four and for oxygen is six right so
minus the number of lone pair and then
half of the bonding electrons so this is
how we're going to do this the first
structure has zero formal charges it's
good and that is in fact the correct
structure the second structure here if
we do it out we have oxygen in the
middle and and we have carbon on the end
and here we should have a formal charge
of minus two on that carbon and plus two
on the middle oxygen so what's it's not
good because it has charges which is not
good but it's also not good because the
negative charge should be on what type
of atom the more electronegative so
that's not true here so that structure
is not good for a variety of reasons
okay so if we look at the next structure
we have six valence electrons around one
of the oxygens we have two bonds to
carbon and two lone pairs and we have oh
actually we have six around the other
one as well
so first off if you counted
there's more valence electrons used here
than you had so that's not good and if
you look at the charges it's minus 1
minus 2 and minus 1 so that's a lot of
charge but also what else is wrong with
that it should all right it should add
up to 0 which it does not and it doesn't
add up to 0 because I put extra valence
electrons in there that do not exist so
this structure is bad for a lot of
reasons also the higher negative charge
is not on the most electronegative atom
so this has many things wrong with it ok
so then if we looked at number 4 so we
have an oxygen with 6 around it a carbon
that has two lone pairs double bonded to
an oxygen with two lone pairs and this
has minus 1 and also minus 1 so again
charges don't add up it has the wrong
number of valence electrons so that's
bad and then the last one we have an
oxygen with 6 lone pair electrons a
carbon with three bonds no lone pair
electrons and an oxygen with 2 double
bonds 2 lone pair electrons minus 1 plus
1 so this is not 0 like that one is up
there but also something else is wrong
what else is wrong with that structure
what's wrong with the carbon
right so it has an incomplete octet and
so sometimes you can have an incomplete
octet does anybody remember what two
elements we mentioned can have our happy
with an incomplete octet boron and
aluminum right and then some of them are
happy with an expanded octet but to be
expanded you have to have an N number of
what three or above so carbon does not
want to have a deficient octet or an
expanded octet so many of these other
ones had a lot of things wrong and so
this is something that could be you it's
useful to review and again Lewis
structures one thing that people go oh
yeah I know how to do it but it's good
to review the rules right before an exam
okay so here was our correct lewis
structure and that Lewis structures did
well that's a good structure okay so now
we now that we know the Lewis structure
we can think about the geometry of the
molecule what its angles are what it
looks like in 3d and we can use our
friend the valence shell electron
repulsion pair repulsion theory and
valence bond theory to predict things
about this structure so why don't you
tell me which ones that these are
correct
all right ten more seconds
alright ok so let's take a look at that
so valence shell electron pair repulsion
theory the ax no ax II nomenclature so X
is the number of atoms bonded and
they're two here so it's a X two if
there had been lone pairs which they're
not on the carbon we would have added an
e to indicate the lone pair and ax two
molecules are linear so here we have our
carbon monoxide just has a single bond
this model kit doesn't have double bonds
but we have a linear a linear molecule
there and again valence shell Theory is
really just about minimizing the
repulsion between things so the atoms
especially those lone pairs that really
take up a lot of room try to position
themselves around the central atom so
it's the least repulsive so in valence
bond Theory leads to the idea of hybrid
orbitals this idea that the valence
electrons are available for bonding and
that you're not really just having s
orbitals and P orbitals separate you're
really forming these hybrid orbitals
which tell you about the geometry around
individual atoms so the number of hybrid
orbitals is the number of bonded atoms
and the number of lone pairs so carbon
has two on bonded atoms so it's SP and N
equals two so it's two SP and oxygen has
one atom and two lone pairs again the
number of bonds doesn't matter here so
it has 1 plus 2 or 3 so it's sp2 and
again N equals 2 so 2 sp2 and then we
can also have questions about the
geometries what are the angles for the
different types of hybridization so this
really gets at what what the geometry at
every atom is like whereas the Vesper is
really thinking about the overall shape
of the molecule and around the central
atom and not so much about the
individual atoms all right
and remember that if we have a singly
bonded terminal atom it's not hybridized
but this is not singly bonded okay
so now we can also ask what is the
polarity of this molecule and that's one
more clicker question
all right ten more seconds
all right so if the polar bear t-shirt
had won it would have given it away but
it doesn't matter you still remembered
so yeah they does have polar bonds
electronegativity difference greater
than 0.4 does make it a polar bond but
because it is linear there's no net
dipole so the the polar bond it's this
cancels each other out with this linear
geometry great so non polar molecule
even though it has polar bonds so it's
not just about the property of the bonds
that's important it's also about the
overall shape of the molecule okay so we
have looked at some of the basic
properties of sio2 now which is the top
part and now let's move in to think
about the reactivity of this of the co2
molecule so when we're thinking about
reactivity we want to say is sio2 a
stable or an unstable molecule compared
to its elements and this is not a
clicker question so you can just tell me
to answer this question about stability
of a molecule compared to its elements
what is the thing I want to know about
yeah I want to know about Delta G I want
to know about the Delta G of formation
of this molecule but if you said Delta G
that would be very good
so here the Delta G of formation of co2
is a negative number it's a fairly big
negative number minus 3 9 4 kilojoules
per mole so is co2 stable or unstable
and you can just yell this out to knock
over
it's a right so a way we're thinking
about this is with Delta G that's
negative it's spontaneous in the forward
direction which means it's not
spontaneous in the reverse direction so
co2 decomposing into its elements is not
spontaneous
so that makes it a stable molecule all
right so let's kind of put all these
things together about co2 now so
according to the Lewis structure it has
double bonds and usually a double bond
means that it's harder to dissociate a
big bond dissociation energy and you
don't need to know these but in case
you're interested when you have carbon
double bonded to oxygen you have a bond
dissociation energy of about 805
kilojoules per mole and it depends a
little on the molecule question but
single bond is more like 358 and so
double bond that's a pretty it's hard to
dissociate that and it's also linear
nonpolar and stable all right so we want
to take co2 and turn it into other stuff
want to make biofuels and solve the
energy problem but this is a non-polar
molecule and it's very stable it has
strong bonds this is a hard challenge
and if we're an easy challenge we would
have figured this out but this is not an
easy challenge it's a hard challenge
which is why it is a big area of
research right now so fixing co2 ie
putting these 1 carbon units together to
make these long-chain carbons like you
saw in Gina's video as you talked about
these multi chain carbons being used as
biofuels this is hard alright so when
things are hard first thing that
scientists often like to do is say
someone solve this problem and can we
steal an idea from them honestly that's
what we do but it's ok when the people
we want to steal from are not really
people but mother nature and so we look
to mother nature and we look to some of
the most intelligent life-forms I know
which are microbes and bacteria oh man
can they do amazing chemistry that we
cannot
do they are fantastic chemists ease
little microbes so one approach is to
look at a microbe that does a process
called escena genesis and that is one of
the six known pathways of co2 fixation
so heceta genesis makes acetate or
what's known as acetyl co a that's
coenzyme a and this is considered the
most ancient pathway of carbon fixation
before kind of origins of life kind of
times high co2 environment that maybe
this was one of the first reactions that
sort of generated metabolic fuel and so
here you have two molecules of co2 one a
blue one in a red that are both
converted to other carbon units that are
then combined with coenzyme a to make a
ctul Kawai which then can go on to make
biofuels so this is what we want to
understand and we want to use this and
turn our co2 into biofuels so but before
we do this again we must understand how
it works and we can ask the following
questions are the redox reactions
involved yes there are
is there acid-base catalysis why yes of
course there is are there transition
metals involved is this hard chemistry
yes therefore pretty much guaranteed
they'll be transition metals involved
are they're challenging rate limiting
steps so there's always something's
always rate limiting absolutely and what
about the chemical equilibrium what
about are accusing case all right so
let's review the second half material
thinking about the process of heceta
genesis first oxidation reduction so you
can tell me with a clicker question what
is happening to co2 is and what's
happening to blue co2 and what's
happening to red co2 are they being
reduced or oxidized
all right ten more seconds
great ok so let's take a look at that so
that is right the top the top reaction
so both of these are +4 it's the same
molecule and so in one case you're going
to minus 2 so it's a 6 electron process
and in the other you're going to plus 2
but both of them are being reduced and
so that is a that's what's happening in
a lot of these carbon fixation pathways
you're reducing carbon dioxide and
making it into hydrocarbons which can be
used for biofuel and the precursor here
is the reduced form of this 2 carbon
molecule this acetyl co a alright so
it's being reduced now this is a fairly
large reduction 6 electrons is a lot
most of the reagents in nature that do
reduction chemistry do one or two
electron processes so 6 is a lot and in
fact it requires 5 different enzymes to
do this 6 electron reduction so it's not
just one enzyme it's multiple enzymes
that need to do this so this raises a
question then how are these carbon units
if you take one you reduce it then you
reduce it again and move it to another
enzyme reduce it again and move it to
another enzyme to reduce it again move
it to another and so on how does that
happen how do the enzymes kind of pass
things along and I think about this as a
problem of like kindergarten soccer so
we have a bunch of enzymes and we have a
bunch of one carbon units but the one
carbon units do not get passed from
enzyme to enzyme in an organized fashion
and in fact sometimes the the enzymes
don't really have control of those one
carbon units they they can't grab it
with their hands that's not allowed and
we know enzymes do not have hands as
such so how do the enzymes grab on to
these one carbon units and how does an
enzyme bring it from one enzyme to the
next and why you know it takes energy to
reduce co2 so you don't want to just
reduce it and kind of pass that along
and then who knows what happens to that
reduce molecule you wanted to go to the
next enzyme in the next
I'm the next enzyme you want to make
your acetyl co a so how does nature do
it it has a solution to the kindergarten
soccer problem and it's solution is a B
vitamin folic acid are also known as
folate and we talked about this before
this is why some people might want to
drink Norwegian beer lots of folic acid
in it or orange juice or eat leafy green
vegetables
so here's folic acid in its large form
and your notes it just has an R this
entire thing is abbreviated as R and
what these enzymes do is they grab onto
our to that arm and they hold onto it
and they bind their one carbon unit over
here and then one enzyme does a
reduction and then it releases it
attached to folic acid the next enzyme
grabs on to the folic acid by the r
group produces it again let's go of it
the next enzyme grabs on to the folic
acid by of the r reduces it again and
this works this is a great thing you
have something small you don't want just
free-floating in the cell especially if
it's not really all that soluble so you
use something else to hold on to it you
use a vitamin to hold on to it this is
great but there's a problem
well first I say it holds on to it
really well you can pass it really well
this is great
but then when you get to the end you're
holding odds weren't really tight you
get to the end how do you get the methyl
group off the folic acid great vehicle
but you need a final step you need to
remove it when you're done so when the
enzymes are done how is this methyl
group ch3 group removed and now we need
to think about acid-base chemistry so it
turns out that the deprotonated form of
folic acid very hard to remove the
methyl group whereas the protonated form
of folic acid here with a proton H in
red it's much easier to remove the
methyl group so if the pKa
folic acid is 4.8 how much of folic acid
will be deprotonated compared to
protonated at physiological pH
all right ten more seconds
yeah
yeah so sometimes these things move
around the fonts change so more will be
deprotonated see that people are paying
attention and and we can look at exactly
how much more so if we're going to look
at exactly how much more what equation
do I want to haul out and Enderson
possible I should have a little
approximate there but still there it is
so we have pH of 7.4 pKa of 4.8 and if
we solve this we have much more that is
deprotonated and again the deprotonated
form is nonreactive so this is true off
the enzyme just a folic acid it is not
in a state that's going to react very
well you're not going to get that methyl
group off very easily most of it will be
deprotonated and nonreactive that's fine
if you're just transporting it and
that's great your body does this you
have methyl tetrahydrofolate in your
blood right now and you have an enzyme
that takes off the methyl group and you
need an enzyme to catalyze it because it
needs to be a catalyzed reaction it's
not going to go on its own so again just
to remember our little pretty pictures
when the pH equals the pKa you have
equal number of moles of protonated and
deprotonated at pH is below the pKa it's
more protonated and a pH is above the
pKa it's more deprotonated okay so again
we have the problem here that the
removal of this methyl group is
challenging this is in fact a very
challenging reaction on both for humans
and microbes and so the solution course
transition metal and in enzyme so you
need both the transition metal vitamin
b12 bound to an enzyme to be able to do
this really challenging chemistry so
this is one of the hard steps
this pathway so vitamin b12 we have
talked about before it's an example of a
naturally occurring metal chelate you
have cobalt in the middle of this Corrin
ring system and you have cobalt in the
plus 1 oxidation state is very reactive
and is capable of removing that methyl
group from the folic acid and
transferring it to itself forming a
methyl cobalt 3 species and here's the
little methyl group on top so we know
about transition metals as well and we
can figure out the D count so we can
look at the periodic table and remember
what about Cobalt what do we need to
know from this number you can just yell
about 9 so we have 9 minus 1 or 8 D 8
and over here we have 9 minus 3 o is
equal 8 no d6 yes there's a type of D D
the D six is right the other math is
incorrect D 6 system okay I was doing
this at 3 o'clock in the morning okay
geometry around the central metal and
it's a little hard to see from this so
I'm gonna help you out so here there are
no upper or lower ligands in the coab
one state so you just have the ring
system so what is this geometry yes so
we have square planar geometry and then
in the coab 3 state you have a methyl
group above and now you're also
interacting with this lower ligand so
now our geometry is what
and what do we call this corn ring that
has four points of attachment petrol
dentes right then from teeth like claws
grabbing on to your metal okay so before
we do our last chemical equilibrium do
we have a winner or need a clot we have
a winner what we have a winner we do not
need a tiebreaker
okay well announce that at the end and
if you're the winning recitation please
come down to collect your t-shirts okay
so very briefly then chemical
equilibrium so this b12 enzyme which
catalyzes the reaction it not only uses
this transition metal but it also
hydrogen bonds to the folic acid and
lowers that transition state energy and
so here is the enzyme and this enzyme
exists in multiple confirmations so we
can think about chemical equilibrium in
terms of enzyme structure chemical
equilibrium applies to so many processes
not just a plus B equals C plus D so
here we have our b12 enzyme the b12 is
bound here and this is the state it's
closed b12 highly reactive so it needs
to be protected when you bind the enzyme
that binds the folic acid it opens a
little when you bind the folic acid it
opens a lot and it's able to do the
methyl transfer reaction then it needs
to close up again to protect the methyl
group and then it needs to go on to
transfer that methyl group to the enzyme
that makes acetyl co a so you have all
of these equilibrium which are shifted
by the binding of various things the
binding of the other enzymes or the
binding of substrates so the important
point is that enzymes are dynamic
chemistry is dynamic this is not about
just chemistry in the solid state
chemistry in solution is cool and
chemistry and solution can save the
planet so
so if you appreciate this this is how
we're going to make biofuels and save
the planet
all right we have what I would consider
a bit of an upset the winner of the 2014
t-shirt clicker competition is Jai's
recitation in second place we have
Lisa's recitation in second place and in
third place which will also have a prize
we have Odin's recitation so good luck
on the final it's been a pleasure
you